In this video you'll learn how to mix Java
and Kotlin code in terms of nullability.
Java types are not divided into
nullable and non-nullable types,
so what happens when you call
Java methods from Kotlin?
Kotlin nullable types under the hood
are implemented using annotations.
If you use the same annotations
to annotate your Java code,
then annotated Java types will be
visible from Kotlin as nullable and
non-nullable Kotlin types accordingly.
An interesting question is, what happens
if you use unannotated Java types?
These are probably the majority of
Java types, let's discuss that.
Such unannotated Java type
will be visible from Kotlin
as a regular Java type and
it will behave like in Java.
It even has a special name,
it's called a platform type.
It's neither nullable nor
a non-nullable type.
You can sometimes see the annotation
type followed by the exclamation mark.
It's annotation, not syntax.
That means you can't declare a variable
of such type in the Kotlin language.
You can only sometimes find
these type in error messages.
If you see it, that means that
this type came from Java and
it is so-called of unknown nullability.
A little bit of history first.
The safest approach when you mix Java and
Kotlin is to interpret each Java
type as nullable Kotlin type.
In this case, you are free from
NullPointerExceptions because you have to
always check for the types explicitly.
And in Kotlin, this approach was tried
at first, but it didn't work out well.
Kotlin wanted it first to interpret
each Java type as nullable type.
But then the early adopters said that
the code was full of exclamation marks and
it wasn't really readable
is the first problem.
The second problem,
which is more important,
is that such an approach doesn't
really work with generics.
It wasn't a solution, so instead
Kotlin uses the idea of platform type,
which refers to the type
that came from Java.
When you see a platform type in
an error message like in this example,
most probably you can safely ignore it.
The fact that you see the exclamation
mark is not connected with the source of
the problem.
Here we try to assign String to Boolean.
The problems lies in incompatible types,
but
is not connected with the fact
that it's a platform type.
Exclamation mark means that the type
came from Java, but you need to look for
a different source of the problem
if you see it in error message.
There is a question to you,
you know that the platform type
behaves like a regular Java type.
What do you think would
happen in this example?
With the reference
available of platform type,
which stores now that came from Java.
We have several options.
NullPointerException is thrown,
null is printed,
compilation error, or
IllegalStateException is thrown.
The right answer here is
NullPointerException.
This code behaves like regular Java.
That means that when we try to reference
the variable of the platform type,
we get NullPointerException.
Kotlin compiler infers the type
of session description as String
platform type since this type
is not annotated in Java.
Kotlin allows you to dereference it,
so you can use it as in Java.
It's a known nullability, so
it can probably work fine.
However, you can also get
a NullPointerException like in Java.
If you use the safe access here,
then everything is fine,
you have null as a result.
Now you know that if you mix Kotlin and
Java,
you'll still have NullPointerExceptions.
It seems that Kotlin doesn't
save you from NPEs in this case.
For convenience, we have to sacrifice
the 100 percentage null safety.
The question than is whether it's still
possible to prevent NullPointerExceptions,
what can be done?
There are still some things
that you can do to achieve
a better level of null safety.
There are two main pieces of advice.
At first,
you can annotate your Java types.
If that's not an option, it's useful just
to specify explicitly types of variables,
which get values from Java functions.
Now let's consider these two
pieces of advice in turn.
First, let's talk about
annotating Java types.
Annotating Java types is easy,
simply add @Nullable and
@NotNull annotations to Java code and
Kotlin will interpret annotated types
as nullable and non-nullable types.
You can annotate a function return tab,
parameter types, and
Kotlin will interpret
the types accordingly.
Different annotations are supported.
Many frameworks define their
own nullability annotations.
Kotlin tries to support all of them.
These annotations have different names,
but they all mean the same.
The question, what happens with the code
after we add nullable notation?
We have all the same possible options.
Here we get a compilation error.
Now Kotlin sees their description function
as the function returning nullable String.
Then it infers the type of the description
variable as nullable String.
That produces an error that you
can't dereference a nullable String.
Now Kotlin forces you to use
either safe access arbitrator or
another way to cope with nullable types.
Annotating Java types really helps,
however,
you can ask whether you really need to
annotate all Java types in your code base.
And the answer is, if you have an option
that might be used by default,
you can specify only the other one.
For instance,
you can annotate only @Nullable types,
if you pick @NotNull by default or
vice versa.
It's supported by a JSR-305.
You need to introduce your own
annotation that specifies the default.
You annotate it itself with
TypeQualifierDefault, define this code for
applicability and specify which value,
@Nullable or @NotNull,
should be used by default.
For instance, you can apply the declared
@MyNonullByDefault annotation to
a package.
But then all the types in this package
would be considered as annotated by
your default choice,
not null, in this example.
Note that the Kotlin compiler
interprets such problems as warnings.
To explicitly make such warnings errors,
you add the compiler option.
Afterward, you get an error if the code
doesn't compile because of nullable and
non-nullable types, which are inferred
using the specified default.
That was all about the first option.
You can annotate your Java types and
you can specify the default annotation to
reduce the number of annotations
added to your Java code.
Read the Kotlin documentation to find
more details about JSR-305 support.
However, annotating Java
code isn't always possible.
With these Java code can be an external
library the party application that you
don't want to touch or you don't
want to annotate the Java code for
some other reasons.
There is still good advice on what can
be done to minimize nullability issues
when you write the code in Kotlin,
which calls Java methods.
The following example
should be rather trivial.
What happens if you add an explicit
nullable type annotation for
our previous example?
The answer is straightforward.
We annotate the type as nullable,
which forces us to check the value
explicitly for being non-null.
Null is printed as a result.
The other case is more interesting.
What happens if you make the explicit
variable type not nullable, but
a regular String?
The same options again.
Now the last option is correct.
You could have guessed that
because all others were
already present
a IllegalStateException is thrown.
Let's look deeper at what's going on here.
If you specify the non-null type
of a variable explicitly and
assign to this variable
something that comes from Java,
formally an expression of a platform type,
then Kotlin generates additional
checks that will throw an exception if
this expression turns out to be null.
That is much better than getting
NullPointerException sometime later
because you know the source
of the problem right away.
You get the detailed
message of what was null.
It's much better than trying to
guess which reference caused NPE and
why like in Java.
If you don't add explicit
types specification,
you have the same problems as in Java.
Let's closely look at what happens in the
bytecode when you define a variable and
assign something that
comes from Java to you.
Kotlin compiler generates
a special additional check
that ensures that your right
expression is not null.
You can assign a value of a platform
type to a non-nullable type.
But if the actual value
turns out to be null,
then the exception will
be thrown at wrong time.
The similar check is generated for your
public APIs that can be called from Java.
The Kotlin compiler tries to
check that what counts and
supposed to be not null is not null.
So no one could pass null while
using the Kotlin function from Java.
These intrinsic checks allow you to catch
all the possible null problems earlier and
with the detailed error messages.
If you want, you can switch off
generating these intrinsic checks, but
they are really useful.
But if it's critical for you, for
example, for performance reasons or
you don't use any Java libraries and
don't mix Kotlin and Java,
it's possible to switch it off
using the compiler option.
Now we've discussed both options
of what you can do to prevent
NullPointerExceptions if you mix
Kotlin and Java in one project.
When you mix Kotlin and Java code
to prevent NPEs you can either add
nullability annotations
to your Java types.
Or add explicit types
specifications to the Kotlin
codes that uses regular Java types.
I would say that Kotlin null
platform types represent a good
compromise between safety and convenience.
On the one hand,
you have [INAUDIBLE] guarantees
when you write pure Kotlin code.
On the other hand, you lose these
guarantees when you use Java libraries.
However, that still works well for
the majority of practical use cases.
Next, we'll discuss how Kotlin List and
Kotlin Mutable List correspond to
Java ToDo List and what kinds of
compromise we can achieve that.